# en-de-sports-translation
## General information
Author: James Levell (leveljam@students.zhaw.ch)  

## Project setup 
The company would like to provide their sports results also in other languages. This translation should be provided automized.  
The origin language of the article is in English and should than be automatically translated. In this part of the projcet we are focusing only on the English -> German translation.  
The articles consists only of several short sentences, common in news tickers.  

## Project goal  
* Provide an automatic translation for sport news texts provided in English  
* Provide a report of the quality of the translation comparing it to common used translators ([Google Translate](https://translate.google.com/), [Deepl](https://www.deepl.com/de/home))  

## Data Sources for the translation model
 * http://www.statmt.org/wmt19/translation-task.html  

# Implementation
The implementation is split into the following parts:  
* Prepare and polish the received data from the costumer and generating dev, training and test set  
* Use the data sources combined with the domain specific training data to train the model  
  * One model is trained on sentence level 
  * The other model is trained on a document / article level 
* Use the model to translate the test set and verify it against common known translators  

# Preparing and polish the data 
The goal is to prepare the received data so it can be used as training, dev and test set.  

## Document level - without sentence splitting
Documentation can be found [here](preparingProjectData_document.md)

## Sentence level - with sentence splitting
Documentation can be found [here](preparingProjectData_sentence.md)

# Creating the translation model  
In this section the aim is to train the model with the data sources and the domain specific training data, which has been created before.  

## Pretask 
The following tasks have to be executed either on which level: [here](preTasks_Marian.md)

## Document level
Documentation can be found [here](marian_sentencesplitting_document.md)

## Sentence level 
Documentation can be found [here](marian_sentencesplitting_sentence.md)

# Translation using the model
The previous created model is now being used to translate the test data.  

Documentation can be found [here](translation_sentenceSplitting.md) 

# Comparing the translations  
The newly translated sentences are now being compared with translations generated by common known translators. 

Documentation can be found [here](analysingResults.md) 

# Scripts  
For this work three scripts have been created: 
## prepareProjectData.ps1
Used to remove inline character returns.  

## sentencesplitter.py
Used to split a document content into individual sentences.  

## validate.sh  
ONLY USED FOR BPE TRANSLATION: 
Used during the training to measure the quality of the translation.

# Other tasks 
## Maximal input sentence length of marian  
Documentation can be found for the sentence splitting example [here](translation_sentenceSplitting.md)

# Further resources 
* Subword to learn and apply BPE: https://github.com/rsennrich/subword-nmt
* Marian documentation for sentence piece: https://github.com/marian-nmt/marian-examples/tree/master/training-basics-sentencepiece